Matt Baker
FIN 5350
Dec 15, 2017
The Role of Computational Economics

##Introduction

James Buchanan's lecture "General Implications of Subjectivity in Economics" discusses the central principle economics, which he believes “should convey is that of the spontaneous coordination which the market achieves”. Buchanan asserts that the Austrian train of thought, which he labels as the "subjectivists" are more effective in conveying this central principle of economics to students that alternative schools of thought. The subjectivist is not worried about describing the allocation of scarce resources among uses between various individuals. The alternative school of thought he is discussing is described as the "objective" train of thought.
I will compare the overarching themes associated with Subjective and Objective views of economics discussed by Buchanan. Economics as a field of study should follow finance in its implementation of variance and arbitrage, along with its necessity to shift from an overarching theme of deregulation and decentralization of planned economies that can stem from an overreliance on models.  
To survive, economics must better implement arbitrage into its curriculum, focus less on constraint problems and more onplace the information content of trades. This will result in economic research and modeling to have more external validity and realism.

#Problems with the Objective Perspective

Buchanan asserts that utility functions, which I will liken to general models, are valuable in “strictly subjective terms, as constructions that cannot, in their nature, be communicated to observers independently of the exchange process within they emerge,” (Buchanan, 87). This brings us to my primary analysis of the follies of economics, and the areas of growth I feel are required for economics to stay relevant. 
Models are an attempt to understand the world in simpler terms. One of the widely used “models” until recently is a paper map used to travel throughout the world. These paper maps show highways, mountain ranges, and towns. It sounds insane to assume that the highways, bodies of water, mountain ranges, and towns in the real world look anywhere near how they do on the map. The function of the map isn’t to show us what the real world looks like, but to help us navigate between points so that we can better understand the real thing. I liken a paper map of downtown Manhattan to the real thing. The map does not show the thousands of bustling workers, the roar of the stock traders on the market floors, nor the obnoxious horns of taxis. This is how the current teaching of economics attempts to describe the world. 
The objective perspective dominates the field of economics. It uses mathematics and data to understand the distribution of scarce resources between individuals. This is how economists are able derive an individual's utility function: a mathematical equation to display an individual’s preferences for various goods. The primary goal is to maximize objective functions subject to resource and budget constraints. Buchanan warns of this maximization paradigm, which can create a view of economics as applied mathematics or social engineering. With this perspective, there must also be an obscure, but objectively computable equilibrium set of prices. This leads us to believe that we can somehow arrange the market into a perfect equilibrium that maximizes the desires of all market participants. Buchanan summarized this by stating that:
“To the extent that quantities may be measured, independently of choice behavior and hence objectively, there must exist an objectively determinate “solution” to any problem that is posed. There is some “optimal” allocation of economic resources, defined by the physical units of resource located in time and space,” (Buchanan, 84-85). 
	
#Prices as a Catalyst of Information

The academic paper “The Use of Knowledge in Society” by Austrian economist Friedrich August von Hayek. According to Hayek, there are two different types of knowledge present society. The first is a natural type of knowledge that everyone possesses, which cannot be described in any mathematical sense. The second is often used by scientific experts, an in economics, takes the form of the objectivist. In an interdependent economy, “prices act to coordinate the separate actions of different people” (Hayek). Individuals base their market decisions off the price of the good in question, which contains all available information they need to know about the good. Hayek describes the price system as “a mechanism for communicating information” to the individual market participants (Hayek). It converts all available information into a value that everyone can understand. Millions of tiny adjustments are made every second throughout the economy as firms compete between each other, which causes prices to adjust. This occurs regardless of the objective function or preferences of individuals. 

“The Stock Price Reaction to the Challenger Disaster” by ____, _____ is one of the most compelling articles I have read displaying the power of prices to reflect information. It discusses the instance of the Challenger Disaster in 1986. Within minutes of the explosion, investors began to sell the stocks of the four companies (Lockheed, Martin Marietta, Rockwell, and Morton Thiokol) that constructed the rocket. Immediately following the explosion, the stock prices of all four companies had fallen between 2 and 8 percent, with Morton Thiokol being placed on a trading halt (_____). Morton Thiokal’s stock price declined 12 percent in one day, which was more than six standard deviations larger than their average daily return. Within the afternoon, the stock prices of the other three companies had crept back up to only a few percent of their original prices. The government investigation took five months to identify that the O-rings on the booster rockets produced by Morton Thiokal were the reason for the challenger disaster. This means that the market identified Morton Thiokal as the culprit for the challenger disaster within one afternoon, roughly 150 times faster than the government. The researchers could not discern any evidence of insider trading or public knowledge of the faulty O-rings prior to the explosion. This example presents incredible evidence of how the market processes information effectively.

Because all individuals possess the natural type of knowledge described by Hayek, individuals seemingly act as one in the market due to their overlap of knowledge. All relevant information is communicated to them, which causes them to participate and make rational choices based on the price of a good. Only conceptually is it possible to imagine “a single mind possessing all the information which is in fact among all the people involved in the process,” (Hayek). This brings me to my next criticism of economics, in the form of macroeconomic policy and central planning.

Overgeneralization of Economic Models

Comparing this class with my other economics and finance classes has been very interesting. This semester, I took Intermediate Macroeconomics and we focused a large amount of our time around the Keynesian IS-LM Model. Keynes’ overgeneralizations about how the government can respond to shifts in supply and demand creates an overreliance on the model. The IS-LM model shows the relationship of the IS curve, derived from aggregate consumer investment, and the LM curve, derived from the demand for real money balances, and plot how the interest rate and GDP interact. Keynes’ findings asserted that tax cuts, and increases in government spending could effectively end a country’s recession. This comes from the assumption that the Government can spend money more effectively than the individual. Keynes’ view is centered on Neo-classical economic thought, which largely overgeneralizes individuals and how the economy operates. We have seen time and time again how the Keynesian model has been used to increase Government spending and plan economies.
Failures in Central Planning
The intention of planned economies is to level the playing field, help the poor, and stimulate the economy. In the 1960’s, billions of dollars in foreign aid were given to India to aide their failing economy. Western economic planners urged India to regulate, calculate, and plan its economy to stimulate it using models. The Indian government nationalized the country’s largest banks, which then loaned money to special interest companies that favored the plans of the government. This creates monopolistic profits to the firms that were fortunate enough to hold licenses. The government had inadvertently created a state sponsored capitalism, which made the poor even poorer. Other developing countries flourished when they implemented open markets. South Korea deregulated their economy, and allowed prices to reach equilibrium on their own. In the 1960’s, India’s per capita GDP was three-fourths of South Korea’s. Twenty years later, South Korea’s per capita GDP was more than five times that of India’s. 
Another prominent example is East and West Germany after WWII. West Germany, controlled by the Allied Forces, operated as an open market, while Eastern Germany, controlled by the Soviets, implemented a state planned economy. The government set prices for goods instead of letting the prices be determined by the market. West Germany was tremendously more successful that East Germany. The culture of West Germany became prosperous and rich, while East Germany became a legitimate holding cell. Individuals attempting to leave East Germany were often killed by their own government. Adam Smith declared that policymakers are “often so in love with the supposed beauty of his own ideal plan of government that he can’t allow the slightest deviation from any part of it…He seems to imagine that he can arrange the members of a great society as easily as a hand arranges the pieces on a chess-board!” (Smith, 124). 

#Possible Solutions

The objectivist perspective tends to rely on the concept that the tempororary inefficiencies in the market result from a lack of regulation or enforcement, while the subjectivist understands that this is arbitragers equilibrating the price. This is one area where Buchanan even asserts that Hayek could not understand. Because of modern day technology and the speed of our trading computers, we know that prices are not efficient at every instance. Arbitragers exploit temporary discrepancies in market information by buying low and selling high. These discrepancies can occur in fractions of seconds, but arbitragers are able to equilibrate the price. High-speed trading is a great example of arbitragers bringing markets to new price equilibriums. The algorithms they develop can make pennies on the dollar by buying an underlying asset and selling it within fractions of a second. Many individuals are upset by this, but it’s a great application of arbitrage and the power of competition. The individual firms that were being arbitraged had no problem with the prices they were paying, until they discovered what was happening. 

#Econometrics

One of the most prominent econometric models analyzes this principle in its entirety. Joel Hasbrouck’s paper "Measuring the Information Content of Stock Trades" is a perfect example of what an econometric model should look like, and the field where economics can hope to expand. Using an econometric model, Hasbrouck builds a bridge between Hayek's theoretical interpretation of price and the real-world stock market. The premise of Hasbrouck's paper is to effectively explain the causal relationship between Buyer Initiative and the Quote Revision in a market with asymmetric information.
Hasbrouck describes in his paper the way in which the full impact of trade is felt with a projected lag and not instantaneously. This can explain the tiny periods when the market is inefficient, and possibilities for arbitrage are available. This is how high speed traders can make pennies on the dollar resulting in billion dollar profits per year. 
Furthermore, Hasbrouck's model is a great example of how economic models should be used in financial analysis. The model uses a vector auto regression analysis to successfully show a causal relationship between buyer initiative and the price of stocks. A financial analyst could run these models to determine if their stock transactions will have a positive or negative impact on the price of that stock. They also can analyze the effects on the number of stocks they choose to invest.
It is essential that economics implement more models like this into its understanding and teaching. This is the way firms and fund managers choose to invest in stocks, and if it is affecting the economy on such a large scale, economists should understand what is going on.

#Economic Forecasting

 Buchanan asserts that “persons choose among alternatives as they arise, and that there is hopefully, enough consistency in their behavior to allow us to make some predictions about changes in outcomes because of changes in the choice alternatives,” (Buchanan, 87). This challenges the objectivist view of economics, and asserts that it is valuable when it can potentially predict the future from past information. This introduces a great article called "Using Simulation to Better Understand Price Determination in a Nonfrictionless Equity Market". In this model, they use past data on equity markets to formulate prices in a frictionless market, with perfect efficiency, and then in semistrong form efficiency. They found drastically different outcomes in each of the experiments, finding that the asymetric informational model posessed "accentuated volatility, excess kurtosis, and negative autocorrelation in short-period returns" for prices and quotes. This shows the drastically different outcomes that arise when we model things in an unrealistic way than they are. 

#Conclusion

When comparing Buchanan's "central theme" of economics, one concept becomes painstakingly clear. The objectivists must learn that “the principle of order occurs despite, rather than because, of his analytical paradigm” (Buchanan, 84). The analytical paradigm he mentions is the maximization of resources between two individuals, and the principle of order is the simultaneous coordination that prices facilitate in the market. When we begin to observe prices as the aggregate of all inforamtion relating to a good or service, it removes the importance of an objective function.


Citations:
"Using Simulation to Better Understand Price Determination in a Nonfrictionless Equity Market"
"The Clash of Economic Ideas"
"The Use of Knowledge In Society"
"General Implications of Subjectivity in Economics"
